Dear Hiring Team,
I am writing to express my interest in the Machine Learning Engineer position, with a focus on Recommender Systems (RS) at SoundCloud.
To describe myself shortly, I am an applied mathematician with 8 years of experience from academia,
 transitioning to Machine Learning roles such as yours. 
 To ease things, I have completed the Applied Data Science Program last year at MIT, where I learned a number of modern tools (there was specific lecture on RS, in which we explored Python's Surprise library.
 While I thrived in academia (Believe it or not, but I was offered a tenure-track professor position (Probability theory) in Lisbon, which I declined),
 I am looking for a challenge that will allow me to apply my knowledge and skills to real-world problems. 
 If you wonder why I particularly want to join your team, here are some reasons why:

 - If you have a look at my google scholar publications list,
 you will see that I possess a hybrid background: while I published most of my papers to Probability Theory journals,
 I have also studied and published in control theory (Stochastic or PDE) and Numerics. 
 Similarly, Recommendation systems involve several domains of mathematics (rather than just one) and those intersect quite well with the 3 above-mentioned fields.

- I have a strong interest in Machine Learning (especially RS, but also Deep learning and NLP).
This is definitely an area that I have been working on for the past 3-4 years, first as a tool for testing mathematical models in neuroscience (with Pytorch),
second as a hobby, and finally as a core skill that would allow me to open to industry perspectives.
I feel that ML is an area where I can both apply my rigor (I gained it through regular publications in peer-reviewed mathematical journals) and my creativity.

- I am particularly interesed in the challenge of improving the existing code for Recommender Systems,
  for instance by optimizing and rewriting existing algorithms to work natively in low-level languages like C++ or Rust, both of which I have recently studied (if you need reassurance, I am confident that these skill are transferable to Java).
Note that my (Python) MIT capstone project focused on creating a content-based and collaborative filtering 
 recommender system on Amazon/Spotify datasets, as can be seen on my corresponding GitHub repository.
 

Furthermore, during my free time, I have taken the initiative -- through continuous learning platforms like Coursera -- to learn how to code a Language Model (LLM) application
 using Langchain, and even learned how to deploy it with AWS.
This exercise (along with a few other ones) has provided me with a background for recent LLM technologies. This also gave me fresh ideas for my future projects, notably on RS, and I am willing to bring these to SoundCloud.

Lastly, I hope that this letter (as well as the attached cv) overall illustrate my adaptability, a trait that will be essential to integrate more efficiently to your team.
Together with my problem-solving skills, this could only make me better at contributing to SoundCloud's mission.

Thank you for considering my application. I look forward to the opportunity to discuss my qualifications further.

Sincerely, Antoine Hocquet
