Genesis 1:1	In the beginning, God created heaven and earth.
Genesis 1:2	But the earth was empty and unoccupied, and darknesses were over the face of the abyss; and so the Spirit of God was brought over the waters.
Genesis 1:3	And God said, “Let there be light.” And light became.
Genesis 1:4	And God saw the light, that it was good; and so he divided the light from the darknesses.
Genesis 1:5	And he called the light, ‘Day,’ and the darknesses, ‘Night.’ And it became evening and morning, one day.
Genesis 1:6	God also said, “Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide waters from waters.”
Genesis 1:7	And God made a firmament, and he divided the waters that were under the firmament, from those that were above the firmament. And so it became.
Genesis 1:8	And God called the firmament ‘Heaven.’ And it became evening and morning, the second day.
Genesis 1:9	Truly God said: “Let the waters that are under heaven be gathered together into one place; and let the dry land appear.” And so it became.
Genesis 1:10	And God called the dry land, ‘Earth,’ and he called the gathering of the waters, ‘Seas.’ And God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:11	And he said, “Let the land spring forth green plants, both those producing seed, and fruit-bearing trees, producing fruit according to their kind, whose seed is within itself, over all the earth.” And so it became.
Genesis 1:12	And the land brought forth green plants, both those producing seed, according to their kind, and trees producing fruit, with each having its own way of sowing, according to its species. And God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:13	And it became evening and the morning, the third day.
Genesis 1:14	Then God said: “Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven. And let them divide day from night, and let them become signs, both of the seasons, and of the days and years.
Genesis 1:15	Let them shine in the firmament of heaven and illuminate the earth.” And so it became.
Genesis 1:16	And God made two great lights: a greater light, to rule over the day, and a lesser light, to rule over the night, along with the stars.
Genesis 1:17	And he set them in the firmament of heaven, to give light over all the earth,
Genesis 1:18	and to rule over the day as well as the night, and to divide light from darkness. And God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:19	And it became evening and morning, the fourth day.
Genesis 1:20	And then God said, “Let the waters produce animals with a living soul, and flying creatures above the earth, under the firmament of heaven.”
Genesis 1:21	And God created the great sea creatures, and everything with a living soul and the ability to move that the waters produced, according to their species, and all the flying creatures, according to their kind. And God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:22	And he blessed them, saying: “Increase and multiply, and fill the waters of the sea. And let the birds be multiplied above the land.”
Genesis 1:23	And it became evening and morning, the fifth day.
Genesis 1:24	God also said, “Let the land produce living souls in their kind: cattle, and animals, and wild beasts of the earth, according to their species.” And so it became.
Genesis 1:25	And God made the wild beasts of the earth according to their species, and the cattle, and every animal on the land, according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:26	And he said: “Let us make Man to our image and likeness. And let him rule over the fish of the sea, and the flying creatures of the air, and the wild beasts, and the entire earth, and every animal that moves on the earth.”
Genesis 1:27	And God created man to his own image; to the image of God he created him; male and female, he created them.
Genesis 1:28	And God blessed them, and he said, “Increase and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the flying creatures of the air, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.”
Genesis 1:29	And God said: “Behold, I have given you every seed-bearing plant upon the earth, and all the trees that have in themselves the ability to sow their own kind, to be food for you,
Genesis 1:30	and for all the animals of the land, and for all the flying things of the air, and for everything that moves upon the earth and in which there is a living soul, so that they may have these on which to feed.” And so it became.
Genesis 1:31	And God saw everything that he had made. And they were very good. And it became evening and morning, the sixth day.
Genesis 2:1	And so the heavens and the earth were completed, with all their adornment.
Genesis 2:2	And on the seventh day, God fulfilled his work, which he had made. And on the seventh day he rested from all his work, which he had accomplished.
Genesis 2:3	And he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it. For in it, he had ceased from all his work: the work whereby God created whatever he should make.
Genesis 2:4	These are the generations of heaven and earth, when they were created, in the day when the Lord God made heaven and earth,
Genesis 2:5	and every sapling of the field, before it would rise up in the land, and every wild plant, before it would germinate. For the Lord God had not brought rain upon the earth, and there was no man to work the land.
Genesis 2:6	But a fountain ascended from the earth, irrigating the entire surface of the land.
Genesis 2:7	And then the Lord God formed man from the clay of the earth, and he breathed into his face the breath of life, and man became a living soul.
Genesis 2:8	Now the Lord God had planted a Paradise of enjoyment from the beginning. In it, he placed the man whom he had formed.
Genesis 2:9	And from the soil the Lord God produced every tree that was beautiful to behold and pleasant to eat. And even the tree of life was in the midst of Paradise, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
Genesis 2:10	And a river went forth from the place of enjoyment so as to irrigate Paradise, which is divided from there into four heads.
Genesis 2:11	The name of one is the Phison; it is that which runs through all the land of Hevilath, where gold is born;
Genesis 2:12	and the gold of that land is the finest. In that place is found bdellium and the onyx stone.
Genesis 2:13	And the name of the second river is the Gehon; it is that which runs through all the land of Ethiopia.
Genesis 2:14	Truly, the name of the third river is the Tigris; it advances opposite the Assyrians. But the fourth river, it is the Euphrates.
Genesis 2:15	Thus, the Lord God brought the man, and put him into the Paradise of enjoyment, so that it would be attended and preserved by him.
Genesis 2:16	And he instructed him, saying: “From every tree of Paradise, you shall eat.
Genesis 2:17	But from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, you shall not eat. For in whatever day you will eat from it, you will die a death.”
Genesis 2:18	The Lord God also said: “It is not good for the man to be alone. Let us make a helper for him similar to himself.”
Genesis 2:19	Therefore, the Lord God, having formed from the soil all the animals of the earth and all the flying creatures of the air, brought them to Adam, in order to see what he would call them. For whatever Adam would call any living creature, that would be its name.
Genesis 2:20	And Adam called each of the living things by their names: all the flying creatures of the air, and all the wild beasts of the land. Yet truly, for Adam, there was not found a helper similar to himself.
Genesis 2:21	And so the Lord God sent a deep sleep upon Adam. And when he was fast asleep, he took one of his ribs, and he completed it with flesh for it.
Genesis 2:22	And the Lord God built up the rib, which he took from Adam, into a woman. And he led her to Adam.
Genesis 2:23	And Adam said: “Now this is bone from my bones, and flesh from my flesh. This one shall be called woman, because she was taken from man.”
Genesis 2:24	For this reason, a man shall leave behind his father and mother, and he shall cling to his wife; and the two shall be as one flesh.
Genesis 2:25	Now they were both naked: Adam, of course, and his wife. And they were not ashamed.
Genesis 3:1	However, the serpent was more crafty than any of the creatures of the earth that the Lord God had made. And he said to the woman, “Why has God instructed you, that you should not eat from every tree of Paradise?”
Genesis 3:2	The woman responded to him: “From the fruit of the trees which are in Paradise, we eat.
Genesis 3:3	Yet truly, from the fruit of the tree which is in the middle of Paradise, God has instructed us that we should not eat, and that we should not touch it, lest perhaps we may die.”
Genesis 3:4	Then the serpent said to the woman: “By no means will you die a death.
Genesis 3:5	For God knows that, on whatever day you will eat from it, your eyes will be opened; and you will be like gods, knowing good and evil.”
Genesis 3:6	And so the woman saw that the tree was good to eat, and beautiful to the eyes, and delightful to consider. And she took from its fruit, and she ate. And she gave to her husband, who ate.
Genesis 3:7	And the eyes of them both were opened. And when they realized themselves to be naked, they joined together fig leaves and made coverings for themselves.
Genesis 3:8	And when they had heard the voice of the Lord God taking a walk in Paradise in the afternoon breeze, Adam and his wife hid themselves from the face of the Lord God in the midst of the trees of Paradise.
Genesis 3:9	And the Lord God called Adam and said to him: “Where are you?”
Genesis 3:10	And he said, “I heard your voice in Paradise, and I was afraid, because I was naked, and so I hid myself.”
Genesis 3:11	He said to him, “Then who told you that you were naked, if you have not eaten of the tree from which I instructed you that you should not eat?”
Genesis 3:12	And Adam said, “The woman, whom you gave to me as a companion, gave to me from the tree, and I ate.”
Genesis 3:13	And the Lord God said to the woman, “Why have you done this?” And she responded, “The serpent deceived me, and I ate.”
Genesis 3:14	And the Lord God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are cursed among all living things, even the wild beasts of the earth. Upon your breast shall you travel, and the ground shall you eat, all the days of your life.
Genesis 3:15	I will put enmities between you and the woman, between your offspring and her offspring. She will crush your head, and you will lie in wait for her heel.”
Genesis 3:16	To the woman, he also said: “I will multiply your labors and your conceptions. In pain shall you give birth to sons, and you shall be under your husband’s power, and he shall have dominion over you.”
Genesis 3:17	Yet truly, to Adam, he said: “Because you have listened to the voice of your wife, and have eaten of the tree, from which I instructed you that you should not eat, cursed is the land that you work. In hardship shall you eat from it, all the days of your life.
Genesis 3:18	Thorns and thistles shall it produce for you, and you shall eat the plants of the earth.
Genesis 3:19	By the sweat of your face shall you eat bread, until you return to the earth from which you were taken. For dust you are, and unto dust you shall return.”
Genesis 3:20	And Adam called the name of his wife, ‘Eve,’ because she was the mother of all the living.
Genesis 3:21	The Lord God also made for Adam and his wife garments from skins, and he clothed them.
Genesis 3:22	And he said: “Behold, Adam has become like one of us, knowing good and evil. Therefore, now perhaps he may put forth his hand and also take from the tree of life, and eat, and live in eternity.”
Genesis 3:23	And so the Lord God sent him away from the Paradise of enjoyment, in order to work the earth from which he was taken.
Genesis 3:24	And he cast out Adam. And in front of the Paradise of enjoyment, he placed the Cherubim with a flaming sword, turning together, to guard the way to the tree of life.
Genesis 4:1	Truly, Adam knew his wife Eve, who conceived and gave birth to Cain, saying, “I have obtained a man through God.”
Genesis 4:2	And again she gave birth to his brother Abel. But Abel was a pastor of sheep, and Cain was a farmer.
Genesis 4:3	Then it happened, after many days, that Cain offered gifts to the Lord, from the fruits of the earth.
Genesis 4:4	Abel likewise offered from the firstborn of his flock, and from their fat. And the Lord looked with favor on Abel and his gifts.
Genesis 4:5	Yet in truth, he did not look with favor on Cain and his gifts. And Cain was vehemently angry, and his countenance fell.
Genesis 4:6	And the Lord said to him: “Why are you angry? And why is your face fallen?
Genesis 4:7	If you behave well, will you not receive? But if you behave badly, will not sin at once be present at the door? And so its desire will be within you, and you will be dominated by it.”
Genesis 4:8	And Cain said to his brother Abel, “Let us go outside.” And when they were in the field, Cain rose up against his brother Abel, and he put him to death.
Genesis 4:9	And the Lord said to Cain, “Where is your brother Abel?” And he responded: “I do not know. Am I my brother’s keeper?”
Genesis 4:10	And he said to him: “What have you done? The voice of your brother’s blood cries out to me from the land.
Genesis 4:11	Now, therefore, you will be cursed upon the land, which opened its mouth and received the blood of your brother at your hand.
Genesis 4:12	When you work it, it will not give you its fruit; a vagrant and a fugitive shall you be upon the land.”
Genesis 4:13	And Cain said to the Lord: “My iniquity is too great to deserve kindness.
Genesis 4:14	Behold, you have cast me out this day before the face of the earth, and from your face I will be hidden; and I will be a vagrant and a fugitive on the earth. Therefore, anyone who finds me will kill me.”
Genesis 4:15	And the Lord said to him: “By no means will it be so; rather, whoever would kill Cain, will be punished sevenfold.” And the Lord placed a seal upon Cain, so that anyone who found him would not put him to death.
Genesis 4:16	And so Cain, departing from the face of the Lord, lived as a fugitive on the earth, toward the eastern region of Eden.
Genesis 4:17	Then Cain knew his wife, and she conceived and gave birth to Enoch. And he built a city, and he called its name by the name of his son, Enoch.
Genesis 4:18	Thereafter, Enoch conceived Irad, and Irad conceived Mahujael, and Mahujael conceived Mathusael, and Mathusael conceived Lamech.
Genesis 4:19	Lamech took two wives: the name of one was Adah, and the name of the other was Zillah.
Genesis 4:20	And Adah conceived Jabel, who was the father of those who live in tents and are shepherds.
Genesis 4:21	And the name of his brother was Jubal; he was the father of those who sing to the harp and the organ.
Genesis 4:22	Zillah also conceived Tubalcain, who was a hammerer and artisan in every work of brass and iron. In fact, the sister of Tubalcain was Noema.
Genesis 4:23	And Lamech said to his wives Adah and Zillah: “Listen to my voice, you wives of Lamech, pay attention to my speech. For I have killed a man to my own harm, and an adolescent to my own bruising.
Genesis 4:24	Sevenfold vengeance will be given for Cain, but for Lamech, seventy-seven times.”
Genesis 4:25	Adam also knew his wife again, and she gave birth to a son, and she called his name Seth, saying, “God has given me another offspring, in place of Abel, whom Cain killed.”
Genesis 4:26	But to Seth also was born a son, whom he called Enos. This one began to invoke the name of the Lord.
Genesis 5:1	This is the book of the lineage of Adam. In the day that God created man, he made him to the likeness of God.
Genesis 5:2	He created them, male and female; and he blessed them. And he called their name Adam, in the day when they were created.
Genesis 5:3	Then Adam lived for one hundred and thirty years. And then he conceived a son in his own image and likeness, and he called his name Seth.
Genesis 5:4	And after he conceived Seth, the days of Adam that passed were eight hundred years. And he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:5	And all the time that passed while Adam lived was nine hundred and thirty years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:6	Seth likewise lived for one hundred and five years, and then he conceived Enos.
Genesis 5:7	And after he conceived Enos, Seth lived for eight hundred and seven years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:8	And all the days of Seth that passed were nine hundred and twelve years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:9	In truth, Enos lived ninety years, and then he conceived Cainan.
Genesis 5:10	After his birth, he lived eight hundred and fifteen years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:11	And all the days of Enos that passed were nine hundred and five years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:12	Likewise, Cainan lived seventy years, and then he conceived Mahalalel.
Genesis 5:13	And after he conceived Mahalalel, Cainan lived for eight hundred and forty years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:14	And all the days of Cainan that passed were nine hundred and ten years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:15	And Mahalalel lived sixty-five years, and then he conceived Jared.
Genesis 5:16	And after he conceived Jared, Mahalalel lived for eight hundred and thirty years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:17	And all the days of Mahalalel that passed were eight hundred and ninety-five years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:18	And Jared lived for one hundred and sixty-two years, and then he conceived Enoch.
Genesis 5:19	And after he conceived Enoch, Jared lived for eight hundred years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:20	And all the days of Jared that passed were nine hundred and sixty-two years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:21	Now Enoch lived for sixty-five years, and then he conceived Methuselah.
Genesis 5:22	And Enoch walked with God. And after he conceived Methuselah, he lived for three hundred years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:23	And all the days of Enoch that passed were three hundred and sixty-five years.
Genesis 5:24	And he walked with God, and then he was seen no more, because God took him.
Genesis 5:25	Likewise, Methuselah lived for one hundred and eighty-seven years, and then he conceived Lamech.
Genesis 5:26	And after he conceived Lamech, Methuselah lived for seven hundred and eighty-two years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:27	And all the days of Methuselah that passed were nine hundred and sixty-nine years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:28	Then Lamech lived for one hundred and eighty-two years, and he conceived a son.
Genesis 5:29	And he called his name Noah, saying, “This one will console us from the works and hardships of our hands, in the land that the Lord has cursed.”
Genesis 5:30	And after he conceived Noah, Lamech lived for five hundred and ninety-five years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 5:31	And all the days of Lamech that passed were seven hundred and seventy-seven years, and then he died.
Genesis 5:32	In truth, when Noah was five hundred years old, he conceived Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
Genesis 6:1	And when men began to be multiplied upon the earth, and daughters were born to them,
Genesis 6:2	the sons of God, seeing that the daughters of men were beautiful, took to themselves wives from all whom they chose.
Genesis 6:3	And God said: “My spirit shall not remain in man forever, because he is flesh. And so his days shall be one hundred and twenty years.”
Genesis 6:4	Now giants were upon the earth in those days. For after the sons of God went in to the daughters of men, and they conceived, these became the powerful ones of ancient times, men of renown.
Genesis 6:5	Then God, seeing that the wickedness of men was great upon the earth and that every thought of their heart was intent upon evil at all times,
Genesis 6:6	repented that he had made man on the earth. And being touched inwardly with a sorrow of heart,
Genesis 6:7	he said, “I will eliminate man, whom I have created, from the face of the earth, from man to other living things, from animals even to the flying things of the air. For it grieves me that I have made them.”
Genesis 6:8	Yet truly, Noah found grace before the Lord.
Genesis 6:9	These are the generations of Noah. Noah was a just man, and yet he was predominate among his generations, for he walked with God.
Genesis 6:10	And he conceived three sons: Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
Genesis 6:11	Yet the earth was corrupted before the eyes of God, and it was filled with iniquity.
Genesis 6:12	And when God had seen that the earth had been corrupted, (indeed, all flesh had corrupted its way upon the earth)
Genesis 6:13	he said to Noah: “The end of all flesh has arrived in my sight. The earth has been filled with iniquity by their presence, and I will destroy them, along with the earth.
Genesis 6:14	Make yourself an ark from smoothed wood. You shall make little dwelling places in the ark, and you shall smear pitch on the interior and exterior.
Genesis 6:15	And thus shall you make it: The length of the ark shall be three hundred cubits, its width fifty cubits, and its height thirty cubits.
Genesis 6:16	You shall make a window in the ark, and you shall complete it within a cubit of the top. Then you shall set the door of the ark at its side. You shall make in it: a lower part, upper rooms, and a third level.
Genesis 6:17	Behold, I shall bring the waters of a great flood upon the earth, so as to put to death all flesh in which there is the breath of life under heaven. All things that are on the earth shall be consumed.
Genesis 6:18	And I shall establish my covenant with you, and you shall enter the ark, you and your sons, your wife and the wives of your sons with you.
Genesis 6:19	And from every living thing of all that is flesh, you shall lead pairs into the ark, so that they may survive with you: from the male sex and the female,
Genesis 6:20	from birds, according to their kind, and from beasts, in their kind, and from among all animals on earth, according to their kind; pairs from each shall enter with you, so that they may be able to live.
Genesis 6:21	Therefore, you shall take with you from all the foods that are able to be eaten, and you shall carry these with you. And these shall be used as food, some for you, and the rest for them.”
Genesis 6:22	And so Noah did all things just as God had instructed him.
Genesis 7:1	And the Lord said to him: “Enter the ark, you and all your house. For I have seen you to be just in my sight, within this generation.
Genesis 7:2	From all the clean animals, take seven and seven, the male and the female. Yet truly, from animals that are unclean, take two and two, the male and the female.
Genesis 7:3	But also from the birds of the air, take seven and seven, the male and the female, so that offspring may be saved upon the face of the whole earth.
Genesis 7:4	For from that point, and after seven days, I will rain upon the earth for forty days and forty nights. And I will wipe away every substance that I have made, from the surface of the earth.”
Genesis 7:5	Therefore, Noah did all things just as the Lord had commanded him.
Genesis 7:6	And he was six hundred years old when the waters of the great flood inundated the earth.
Genesis 7:7	And Noah entered into the ark, and his sons, his wife, and the wives of his sons with him, because of the waters of the great flood.
Genesis 7:8	And from the animals both clean and unclean, and from the birds, and from everything that moves upon the earth,
Genesis 7:9	two by two they were brought into the ark to Noah, male and female, just as the Lord had instructed Noah.
Genesis 7:10	And when seven days had passed, the waters of the great flood inundated the earth.
Genesis 7:11	In the six hundredth year of the life of Noah, in the second month, in the seventeenth day of the month, all the fountains of the great abyss were released, and the floodgates of heaven were opened.
Genesis 7:12	And rain came upon the earth for forty days and forty nights.
Genesis 7:13	On the very same day, Noah and his sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and his wife and the three wives of his sons with them, entered the ark.
Genesis 7:14	They and every animal according to its kind, and all the cattle in their kind, and everything that moves upon the earth in their kind, and every flying thing according to its kind, all the birds and all that can fly,
Genesis 7:15	entered the ark to Noah, two by two out of all that is flesh, in which there was the breath of life.
Genesis 7:16	And those that entered went in male and female, from all that is flesh, just as God had instructed him. And then the Lord closed him in from the outside.
Genesis 7:17	And the great flood occurred for forty days upon the earth. And the waters were increased, and they lifted the ark high above the land.
Genesis 7:18	For they overflowed greatly, and they filled everything on the surface of the earth. And then the ark was carried across the waters.
Genesis 7:19	And the waters prevailed beyond measure across the earth. And all the lofty mountains under the whole heaven were covered.
Genesis 7:20	The water was fifteen cubits higher than the mountains which it covered.
Genesis 7:21	And all flesh was consumed which moved upon the earth: flying things, animals, wild beasts, and all moving things that crawl upon the ground. And all men,
Genesis 7:22	and everything in which there is the breath of life on earth, died.
Genesis 7:23	And he wiped away all substance that was upon the earth, from man to animal, the crawling things just as much as the flying things of the air. And they were wiped away from the earth. But only Noah remained, and those who were with him in the ark.
Genesis 7:24	And the waters possessed the earth for one hundred and fifty days.
Genesis 8:1	Then God remembered Noah, and all living things, and all the cattle, which were with him in the ark, and he brought a wind across the earth, and the waters were diminished.
Genesis 8:2	And the fountains of the abyss and the floodgates of heaven were closed. And the rain from heaven was restrained.
Genesis 8:3	And the waters were restored to their coming and going from the earth. And they began to diminish after one hundred and fifty days.
Genesis 8:4	And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, upon the mountains of Armenia.
Genesis 8:5	Yet in truth, the waters were departing and decreasing until the tenth month. For in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tips of the mountains appeared.
Genesis 8:6	And when forty days had passed, Noah, opening the window that he had made in the ark, sent forth a raven,
Genesis 8:7	which went forth and did not return, until the waters were dried up across the earth.
Genesis 8:8	Likewise, he sent forth a dove after him, in order to see if the waters had now ceased upon the face of the earth.
Genesis 8:9	But when she did not find a place where her foot might rest, she returned to him in the ark. For the waters were upon the whole earth. And he extended his hand and caught her, and he brought her into the ark.
Genesis 8:10	And then, having waited a further seven days, he again sent forth the dove out of the ark.
Genesis 8:11	And she came to him in the evening, carrying in her mouth an olive branch with green leaves. Noah then understood that the waters had ceased upon the earth.
Genesis 8:12	And nevertheless, he waited another seven days. And he sent forth the dove, which no longer returned to him.
Genesis 8:13	Therefore, in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, on the first day of the month, the waters were diminished upon the earth. And Noah, opening the cover of the ark, gazed out and saw that the surface of the earth had become dry.
Genesis 8:14	In the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was made dry.
Genesis 8:15	Then God spoke to Noah, saying:
Genesis 8:16	“Go out of the ark, you and your wife, your sons and the wives of your sons with you.
Genesis 8:17	Bring out with you all the living things that are with you, all that is flesh: as with the birds, so also with the wild beasts and all the animals that move upon the earth. And enter upon the land: increase and multiply upon it.”
Genesis 8:18	And so Noah and his sons went out, and his wife and the wives of his sons with him.
Genesis 8:19	Then also all living things, and the cattle, and the animals that move upon the earth, according to their kinds, departed from the ark.
Genesis 8:20	Then Noah built an altar to the Lord. And, taking from each of the cattle and birds that were clean, he offered holocausts upon the altar.
Genesis 8:21	And the Lord smelled the sweet odor and said: “I will no longer curse the earth because of man. For the feelings and thoughts of the heart of man are prone to evil from his youth. Therefore, I will no longer pierce every living soul as I have done.
Genesis 8:22	All the days of the earth, seedtime and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, night and day, will not cease.”
Genesis 9:1	And God blessed Noah and his sons. And he said to them: “Increase, and multiply, and fill the earth.
Genesis 9:2	And let the fear and trembling of you be upon all the animals of the earth, and upon all the birds of the air, along with all that moves across the earth. All the fish of the sea have been delivered into your hand.
Genesis 9:3	And everything that moves and lives will be food for you. Just as with the edible plants, I have delivered them all to you,
Genesis 9:4	except that flesh with blood you shall not eat.
Genesis 9:5	For I will examine the blood of your lives at the hand of every beast. So also, at the hand of mankind, at the hand of each man and his brother, I will examine the life of mankind.
Genesis 9:6	Whoever will shed human blood, his blood will be poured out. For man was indeed made to the image of God.
Genesis 9:7	But as for you: increase and multiply, and go forth upon the earth and fulfill it.”
Genesis 9:8	To Noah and to his sons with him, God also said this:
Genesis 9:9	“Behold, I will establish my covenant with you, and with your offspring after you,
Genesis 9:10	and with every living soul that is with you: as much with the birds as with the cattle and all the animals of the earth that have gone forth from the ark, and with all the wild beasts of the earth.
Genesis 9:11	I will establish my covenant with you, and no longer will all that is flesh be put to death by the waters of a great flood, and, henceforth, there will not be a great flood to utterly destroy the earth.”
Genesis 9:12	And God said: “This is the sign of the pact that I grant between me and you, and to every living soul that is with you, for perpetual generations.
Genesis 9:13	I will place my arc in the clouds, and it will be the sign of the pact between myself and the earth.
Genesis 9:14	And when I obscure the sky with clouds, my arc will appear in the clouds.
Genesis 9:15	And I will remember my covenant with you, and with every living soul that enlivens flesh. And there will no longer be waters from a great flood to wipe away all that is flesh.
Genesis 9:16	And the arc will be in the clouds, and I will see it, and I will remember the everlasting covenant that was enacted between God and every living soul of all that is flesh upon the earth.”
Genesis 9:17	And God said to Noah, “This will be the sign of the covenant that I have established between myself and all that is flesh upon the earth.”
Genesis 9:18	And so the sons of Noah, who came out of the ark, were Shem, Ham, and Japheth. Now Ham himself is the father of Canaan.
Genesis 9:19	These three are the sons of Noah. And from these all the family of mankind was spread over the whole earth.
Genesis 9:20	And Noah, a good farmer, began to cultivate the land, and he planted a vineyard.
Genesis 9:21	And by drinking its wine, he became inebriated and was naked in his tent.
Genesis 9:22	Because of this, when Ham, the father of Canaan, had indeed seen the privates of his father to be naked, he reported it to his two brothers outside.
Genesis 9:23	And truly, Shem and Japheth put a cloak upon their arms, and, advancing backwards, covered the privates of their father. And their faces were turned away, so that they did not see their father’s manhood.
Genesis 9:24	Then Noah, awaking from the wine, when he had learned what his younger son had done to him,
Genesis 9:25	he said, “Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants will he be to his brothers.”
Genesis 9:26	And he said: “Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, let Canaan be his servant.
Genesis 9:27	May God enlarge Japheth, and may he live in the tents of Shem, and let Canaan be his servant.”
Genesis 9:28	And after the great flood, Noah lived for three hundred and fifty years.
Genesis 9:29	And all his days were completed in nine hundred and fifty years, and then he died.
Genesis 10:1	These are the generations of the sons of Noah: Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and of the sons who were born to them after the great flood.
Genesis 10:2	The sons of Japheth were Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
Genesis 10:3	And then the sons of Gomer were Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
Genesis 10:4	And the sons of Javan were Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim.
Genesis 10:5	The islands of the Gentiles were divided by these into their regions, each one according to his tongue, and their families in their nations.
Genesis 10:6	And the Sons of Ham were Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan.
Genesis 10:7	And the sons of Cush were Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah, and Sabteca. The sons of Raamah were Sheba and Dadan.
Genesis 10:8	And then Cush conceived Nimrod; he began to be powerful on the earth.
Genesis 10:9	And he was an able hunter before the Lord. From this, a proverb came forth: ‘Just like Nimrod, an able hunter before the Lord.’
Genesis 10:10	And so, the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, and Erech, and Accad, and Chalanne, in the land of Shinar.
Genesis 10:11	From that land, Assur came forth, and he built Nineveh, and the streets of the city, and Calah,
Genesis 10:12	and also Resen, between Nineveh and Calah. This is a great city.
Genesis 10:13	And truly, Mizraim conceived Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, Naphtuhim,
Genesis 10:14	and Pathrusim, and Casluhim, from whom came forth the Philistines and the Caphtorim.
Genesis 10:15	Then Canaan conceived Sidon his firstborn, the Hittite,
Genesis 10:16	and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, the Girgashite,
Genesis 10:17	the Hivite, and the Arkite: the Sinite,
Genesis 10:18	and the Arvadian, the Samarite, and the Hamathite. And after this, the peoples of the Canaanites became widespread.
Genesis 10:19	And the borders of Chanaan went, as one travels, from Sidon to Gerar, even to Gaza, until one enters Sodom and Gomorrah, and from Admah and Zeboiim, even to Lesa.
Genesis 10:20	These are the sons of Ham in their kindred, and tongues, and generations, and lands, and nations.
Genesis 10:21	Likewise, from Shem, the father of all the sons of Heber, the elder brother of Japheth, sons were born.
Genesis 10:22	The sons of Shem were Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
Genesis 10:23	The sons of Aram were Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
Genesis 10:24	But truly, Arphaxad conceived Shelah, from whom was born Eber.
Genesis 10:25	And to Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth became divided, and his brother’s name was Joktan.
Genesis 10:26	This Joktan conceived Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, Jerah
Genesis 10:27	and Hadoram, and Uzal and Diklah,
Genesis 10:28	and Obal and Abimael, Sheba
Genesis 10:29	and Ophir, and Havilah and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.
Genesis 10:30	And their habitation extended from Messa, as one sojourns, even to Sephar, a mountain in the east.
Genesis 10:31	These are the sons of Shem according to their kindred, and tongues, and the regions within their nations.
Genesis 10:32	These are the families of Noah, according to their peoples and nations. The nations became divided according to these, on the earth after the great flood.
Genesis 11:1	Now the earth was of one language and of the same speech.
Genesis 11:2	And when they were advancing from the east, they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt in it.
Genesis 11:3	And each one said to his neighbor, “Come, let us make bricks, and bake them with fire.” And they had bricks instead of stones, and pitch instead of mortar.
Genesis 11:4	And they said: “Come, let us make a city and a tower, so that its height may reach to heaven. And let us make our name famous before we are divided into all the lands.”
Genesis 11:5	Then the Lord descended to see the city and the tower, which the sons of Adam were building.
Genesis 11:6	And he said: “Behold, the people are united, and all have one tongue. And since they have begun to do this, they will not desist from their plans, until they have completed their work.
Genesis 11:7	Therefore, come, let us descend, and in that place confound their tongue, so that they may not listen, each one to the voice of his neighbor.”
Genesis 11:8	And so the Lord divided them from that place into all the lands, and they ceased to build the city.
Genesis 11:9	And for this reason, its name was called ‘Babel,’ because in that place the language of the whole earth became confused. And from then on, the Lord scattered them across the face of every region.
Genesis 11:10	These are the generations of Shem. Shem was one hundred years old when he conceived Arphaxad, two years after the great flood.
Genesis 11:11	And after he conceived Arphaxad, Shem lived for five hundred years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:12	Next, Arphaxad lived for thirty-five years, and then he conceived Shelah.
Genesis 11:13	And after he conceived Shelah, Arphaxad lived for three hundred and three years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:14	Likewise, Shelah lived for thirty years, and then he conceived Eber.
Genesis 11:15	And after he conceived Eber, Shelah lived for four hundred and three years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:16	Then Eber lived for thirty-four years, and he conceived Peleg.
Genesis 11:17	And after he conceived Peleg, Eber lived for four hundred and thirty years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:18	Likewise, Peleg lived for thirty years, and then he conceived Reu.
Genesis 11:19	And after he conceived Reu, Peleg lived for two hundred and nine years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:20	Then Reu lived for thirty-two years, and then he conceived Serug.
Genesis 11:21	Likewise, after he conceived Serug, Reu lived for two hundred and seven years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:22	In truth, Serug lived for thirty years, and then he conceived Nahor.
Genesis 11:23	And after he conceived Nahor, Serug lived for two hundred years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:24	And so Nahor lived for twenty-nine years, and then he conceived Terah.
Genesis 11:25	And after he conceived Terah, Nahor lived for one hundred and nineteen years, and he conceived sons and daughters.
Genesis 11:26	And Terah lived for seventy years, and then he conceived Abram, and Nahor, and Haran.
Genesis 11:27	And these are the generations of Terah. Terah conceived Abram, Nahor, and Haran. Next Haran conceived Lot.
Genesis 11:28	And Haran died before his father Terah, in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldeans.
Genesis 11:29	Then Abram and Nahor took wives. The name of Abram’s wife was Sarai. And the name of Nahor’s wife was Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
Genesis 11:30	But Sarai was barren and had no children.
Genesis 11:31	And so Terah took his son Abram, and his grandson Lot, the son of Haran, and his daughter-in-law Sarai, the wife of his son Abram, and he led them away from Ur of the Chaldeans, to go into the land of Canaan. And they approached as far as Haran, and they dwelt there.
Genesis 11:32	And the days of Terah that passed were two hundred and five years, and then he died in Haran.
Genesis 12:1	Then the Lord said to Abram: “Depart from your land, and from your kindred, and from your father’s house, and come into the land that I will show you.
Genesis 12:2	And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and magnify your name, and you will be blessed.
Genesis 12:3	I will bless those who bless you, and curse those who curse you, and in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.”
Genesis 12:4	And so Abram departed just as the Lord had instructed him, and Lot went with him. Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed from Haran.
Genesis 12:5	And he took his wife Sarai, and Lot, the son of his brother, and all the substance which they had come to possess, and the lives which they had acquired in Haran, and they departed in order to go to the land of Canaan. And when they arrived in it,
Genesis 12:6	Abram passed through the land even to the place of Shechem, as far as the famous steep valley. Now at that time, the Canaanite was in the land.
Genesis 12:7	Then the Lord appeared to Abram, and he said to him, “To your offspring, I will give this land.” And there he built an altar to the Lord, who had appeared to him.
Genesis 12:8	And passing on from there to a mountain, which was opposite the east of Bethel, he pitched his tent there, having Bethel to the west, and Hai on the east. He also built an altar there to the Lord, and he called upon his name.
Genesis 12:9	And Abram traveled, going out and continuing further on, toward the south.
Genesis 12:10	But a famine occurred in the land. And Abram descended to Egypt, to sojourn there. For famine prevailed over the land.
Genesis 12:11	And when he was close to entering Egypt, he said to his wife Sarai: “I know you to be a beautiful woman.
Genesis 12:12	And when the Egyptians see you, they will say, ‘She is his wife.’ And they will put me to death, and retain you.
Genesis 12:13	Therefore, I beg you to say that you are my sister, so that it may be well with me because of you, and so that my soul may live by your favor.”
Genesis 12:14	And so, when Abram had arrived in Egypt, the Egyptians saw that the woman was exceedingly beautiful.
Genesis 12:15	And the princes reported it to Pharaoh, and they praised her to him. And the woman was inducted into the house of Pharaoh.
Genesis 12:16	In truth, they treated Abram well because of her. And he had sheep and oxen and male donkeys, and men servants, and women servants, and female donkeys, and camels.
Genesis 12:17	But the Lord scourged Pharaoh and his house with great wounds because of Sarai, the wife of Abram.
Genesis 12:18	And Pharaoh called Abram, and he said to him: “What is this that you have done to me? Why did you not tell me she was your wife?
Genesis 12:19	For what reason did you claim her to be your sister, so that I would take her to me as a wife? Now therefore, behold your mate, receive her and go.”
Genesis 12:20	And Pharaoh instructed his men about Abram. And they led him away with his wife and all that he had.
Genesis 13:1	Therefore, Abram ascended from Egypt, he and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, toward the southern region.
Genesis 13:2	But he was very wealthy by the possession of gold and silver.
Genesis 13:3	And he returned by the way that he came, from the meridian into Bethel, all the way to the place where before he had pitched his tent, between Bethel and Hai.
Genesis 13:4	There, at the place of the altar he had made before, he again called upon the name of the Lord.
Genesis 13:5	But Lot also, who was with Abram, had flocks of sheep, and cattle, and tents.
Genesis 13:6	Neither was the land able to contain them, so that they might dwell together. Indeed, their substance was so great that they could not live in common.
Genesis 13:7	And then there also arose a conflict between the shepherds of Abram and of Lot. Now at that time the Canaanite and the Perizzite lived in that land.
Genesis 13:8	Therefore, Abram said to Lot: “I ask you, let there be no quarrel between me and you, and between my shepherds and your shepherds. For we are brothers.
Genesis 13:9	Behold, the entire land is before your eyes. Withdraw from me, I beg you. If you will go to the left, I will take the right. If you choose the right, I will pass to the left.”
Genesis 13:10	And so Lot, lifting up his eyes, saw all the region around the Jordan, which was thoroughly irrigated, before the Lord overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It was like the Paradise of the Lord, and it was like Egypt, approaching toward Zoar.
Genesis 13:11	And Lot chose for himself the region around the Jordan, and he withdrew by way of the east. And they were divided, one brother from the other.
Genesis 13:12	Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan. In truth, Lot stayed in the towns that were around the Jordan, and he lived in Sodom.
Genesis 13:13	But the men of Sodom were very wicked, and they were sinners before the Lord beyond measure.
Genesis 13:14	And the Lord said to Abram, after Lot was divided from him: “Lift up your eyes, and gaze out from the place where you are now, to the north and to the meridian, to the east and to the west.
Genesis 13:15	All the land that you see, I will give to you, and to your offspring even forever.
Genesis 13:16	And I will make your offspring like the dust of the earth. If any man is able to number the dust of the earth, he will be able to number your offspring as well.
Genesis 13:17	Arise and walk through the land in its length, and breadth. For I will give it to you.”
Genesis 13:18	Therefore, moving his tent, Abram went and dwelt by the steep valley of Mamre, which is in Hebron. And he built an altar there to the Lord.
Genesis 14:1	Now it happened in that time that Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Pontus, and Chedorlaomer, king of the Elamites, and Tidal, king of the Nations,
Genesis 14:2	went to war against Bera, king of Sodom, and against Birsha, king of Gomorrah, and against Shinab, king of Admah, and against Shemeber, king of Zeboiim, and against the king of Bela, that is Zoar.
Genesis 14:3	All these came together in the wooded valley, which is now the Sea of Salt.
Genesis 14:4	For they had served Chedorlaomer for twelve years, and in the thirteenth year they withdrew from him.
Genesis 14:5	Therefore, in the fourteenth year, Chedorlaomer arrived, and the kings who were with him. And they struck the Rephaim at Ashteroth of the two horns, and the Zuzim with them, and the Emim at Shaveh-Kiriathaim.
Genesis 14:6	and the Chorreans in the mountains of Seir, even to the plains of Paran, which is in wilderness.
Genesis 14:7	And they returned and arrived at the fountain of Mishpat, which is Kadesh. And they struck the entire region of the Amalekites, and the Amorites who dwelt in Hazazontamar.
Genesis 14:8	And the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and indeed the king of Bela, which is Zoar, went forth. And they directed their point against them in the wooded valley,
Genesis 14:9	namely, against Chedorlaomer, king of the Elamites, and Tidal, king of the Nations, and Amraphel, king of Shinar, and Arioch, king of Pontus: four kings against five.
Genesis 14:10	Now the wooded valley had many pits of bitumen. And so the king of Sodom and the king of Gomorrah turned back and they fell there. And those who remained, fled to the mountain.
Genesis 14:11	Then they took all the substance of the Sodomites and the Gomorrahites, and all that pertained to food, and they went away,
Genesis 14:12	along with both Lot, the son of Abram’s brother, who lived in Sodom, and his substance.
Genesis 14:13	And behold, one who had escaped reported it to Abram the Hebrew, who lived in the steep valley of Mamre the Amorite, who was the brother of Eshcol, and the brother of Aner. For these had formed an agreement with Abram.
Genesis 14:14	When Abram had heard this, namely, that his brother Lot had been taken captive, he numbered three hundred and eighteen of his own armed men and he went in pursuit all the way to Dan.
Genesis 14:15	And dividing his company, he rushed upon them in the night. And he struck them and pursued them as far as Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
Genesis 14:16	And he brought back all the substance, and Lot his brother, with his substance, likewise the women and the people.
Genesis 14:17	Then the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after he returned from the slaughter at Chedorlaomer, and the kings who were with him at the valley of Shaveh, which is the valley of the king.
Genesis 14:18	Then in truth, Melchizedek, the king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine, for he was a priest of the Most High God;
Genesis 14:19	he blessed him, and he said: “Blessed be Abram by the Most High God, who created heaven and earth.
Genesis 14:20	And blessed be the Most High God, through whose protection the enemies are in your hands.” And he gave him tithes from everything.
Genesis 14:21	Then the king of Sodom said to Abram, “Give me these souls, and take the rest for yourself.”
Genesis 14:22	And he responded to him: “I lift up my hand to the Lord God, the Most High, the Possessor of heaven and earth,
Genesis 14:23	that from one thread within a blanket, even to a single shoelace, I will not take anything from that which is yours, lest you say, ‘I have enriched Abram,’
Genesis 14:24	except that which the young men have eaten, and the shares for the men who came with me: Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. These will take their shares.”
Genesis 15:1	And so, these things having been transacted, the word of the Lord came to Abram by a vision, saying: “Do not be afraid, Abram, I am your protector, and your reward is exceedingly great.”
Genesis 15:2	And Abram said: “Lord God, what will you give to me? I may go without children. And the son of the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus.”
Genesis 15:3	And Abram added: “Yet to me you have not given offspring. And behold, my servant born in my house will be my heir.”
Genesis 15:4	And immediately the word of the Lord came to him, saying: “This one will not be your heir. But he who will come from your loins, the same will you have for your heir.”
Genesis 15:5	And he brought him outside, and he said to him, “Take in the heavens, and number the stars, if you can.” And he said to him, “So also will your offspring be.”
Genesis 15:6	Abram believed God, and it was reputed to him unto justice.
Genesis 15:7	And he said to him, “I am the Lord who led you away from Ur of the Chaldeans, so as to give you this land, and so that you would possess it.”
Genesis 15:8	But he said, “Lord God, in what way may I be able to know that I will possess it?”
Genesis 15:9	And the Lord responded by saying: “Take for me a cow of three years, and a she-goat of three years, and a ram of three years, also a turtle-dove and a pigeon.”
Genesis 15:10	Taking all these, he divided them through the middle, and placed both parts opposite one another. But the birds he did not divide.
Genesis 15:11	And birds descended upon the carcasses, but Abram drove them away.
Genesis 15:12	And when the sun was setting, a deep sleep fell upon Abram, and a dread, great and dark, invaded him.
Genesis 15:13	And it was said to him: “Know beforehand that your future offspring will be sojourners in a land not their own, and they will subjugate them in servitude and afflict them for four hundred years.
Genesis 15:14	Yet truly, I will judge the nation that they will serve, and after this they will depart with great substance.
Genesis 15:15	But you will go to your fathers in peace and be buried at a good old age.
Genesis 15:16	But in the fourth generation, they will return here. For the iniquities of the Amorites are not yet completed, even to this present time.”
Genesis 15:17	Then, when the sun had set, there came a dark mist, and there appeared a smoking furnace and a lamp of fire passing between those divisions.
Genesis 15:18	On that day, God formed a covenant with Abram, saying: “To your offspring I will give this land, from the river of Egypt, even to the great river Euphrates:
Genesis 15:19	the land of the Kenites and the Kenizzites, the Kadmonites
Genesis 15:20	and the Hittites, and the Perizzites, likewise the Rephaim,
Genesis 15:21	and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites
Genesis 16:1	Now Sarai, the wife of Abram, had not conceived children. But, having an Egyptian handmaid named Hagar,
Genesis 16:2	she said to her husband: “Behold, the Lord has closed me, lest I give birth. Enter to my handmaid, so that perhaps I may receive sons of her at least.” And when he agreed to her supplication,
Genesis 16:3	she took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid, ten years after they began to live in the land of Canaan, and she gave her to her husband as a wife.
Genesis 16:4	And he entered to her. But when she saw that she had conceived, she despised her mistress.
Genesis 16:5	And Sarai said to Abram: “You have acted unfairly against me. I gave my handmaid into your bosom, who, when she saw that she had conceived, held me in contempt. May the Lord judge between me and you.”
Genesis 16:6	Abram responded to her by saying, “Behold, your handmaid is in your hand to treat as it pleases you.” And so, when Sarai afflicted her, she took flight.
Genesis 16:7	And when the Angel of the Lord had found her, near the fountain of water in the wilderness, which is on the way to Shur in the desert,
Genesis 16:8	he said to her: “Hagar, handmaid of Sarai, where have you come from? And where will you go?” And she answered, “I flee from the face of Sarai, my mistress.”
Genesis 16:9	And the Angel of the Lord said to her, “Return to your mistress, and humble yourself under her hand.”
Genesis 16:10	And again he said, “I will multiply your offspring continuously, and they will not be numbered because of their multitude.”
Genesis 16:11	But thereafter he said: “Behold, you have conceived, and you will give birth to a son. And you shall call his name Ishmael, because the Lord has heard your affliction.
Genesis 16:12	He will be a wild man. His hand will be against all, and all hands will be against him. And he will pitch his tents away from the region of all his brothers.”
Genesis 16:13	Then she called upon the name of the Lord who had spoken to her: “You are the God who has seen me.” For she said, “Certainly, here I have seen the back of the one who sees me.”
Genesis 16:14	Because of this, she called that well: ‘The well of the one who lives and who sees me.’ The same is between Kadesh and Bered.
Genesis 16:15	And Hagar gave birth to a son for Abram, who called his name Ishmael.
Genesis 16:16	Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar gave birth to Ishmael for him.
Genesis 17:1	In truth, after he began to be ninety-nine years of age, the Lord appeared to him. And he said to him: “I am the Almighty God. Walk in my sight and become complete.
Genesis 17:2	And I will set my covenant between me and you. And I will multiply you very exceedingly.”
Genesis 17:3	Abram fell prone on his face.
Genesis 17:4	And God said to him: “I AM, and my covenant is with you, and you will be the father of many nations.
Genesis 17:5	No longer will your name be called Abram. But you will be called Abraham, for I have established you as the father of many nations.
Genesis 17:6	And I will cause you to increase very greatly, and I will set you among the nations, and kings will come forth from you.
Genesis 17:7	And I will establish my covenant between me and you, and with your offspring after you in their generations, by a perpetual covenant: to be God to you and to your offspring after you.
Genesis 17:8	And I will give to you and to your offspring, the land of your sojourn, all the land of Canaan, as an eternal possession, and I will be their God.”
Genesis 17:9	Again God said to Abraham: “And you therefore shall keep my covenant, and your offspring after you in their generations.
Genesis 17:10	This is my covenant, which you shall observe, between me and you, and your offspring after you: All the males among you shall be circumcised.
Genesis 17:11	And you shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, so that it may be a sign of the covenant between me and you.
Genesis 17:12	An infant of eight days will be circumcised among you, every male in your generations. So also servants born to you, as well as those bought, shall be circumcised, even those who are not of your stock.
Genesis 17:13	And my covenant shall be with your flesh as an eternal covenant.
Genesis 17:14	The male, the flesh of whose foreskin will not be circumcised, that soul shall be eliminated from his people. For he has made my covenant void.”
Genesis 17:15	God said also to Abraham: “Your wife Sarai, you shall not call Sarai, but Sarah.
Genesis 17:16	And I will bless her, and from her I will give you a son, whom I will bless, and he will be among the nations, and the kings of the peoples will rise from him.”
Genesis 17:17	Abraham fell on his face, and he laughed, saying in his heart: “Do you think a son can be born to a one hundred year old man? And will Sarah give birth at the age of ninety?”
Genesis 17:18	And he said to God, “If only Ishmael would live in your sight.”
Genesis 17:19	And God said to Abraham: “Your wife Sarah shall give birth to a son, and you shall call his name Isaac, and I will establish my covenant with him as a perpetual covenant, and with his offspring after him.
Genesis 17:20	Likewise, concerning Ishmael, I have heard you. Behold, I will bless and enlarge him, and I will multiply him greatly. He will produce twelve leaders, and I will make him into a great nation.
Genesis 17:21	Yet in truth, I will establish my covenant with Isaac, to whom Sarah will give birth for you at this time next year.”
Genesis 17:22	And when he had finished speaking with him, God ascended from Abraham.
Genesis 17:23	Then Abraham took his son Ishmael, and all who were born in his house, and all whom he had bought, every male among the men of his house, and he circumcised the flesh of their foreskin promptly, the very same day, just as God had instructed him.
Genesis 17:24	Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he circumcised the flesh of his foreskin.
Genesis 17:25	And his son Ishmael had completed thirteen years at the time of his circumcision.
Genesis 17:26	On the very same day, Abraham was circumcised with his son Ishmael.
Genesis 17:27	And all the men of his house, those born in his house, as well as those who were bought, even the foreigners, were circumcised with him.
Genesis 18:1	Then the Lord appeared to him, in the steep valley of Mamre, when he was sitting at the door of his tent, in the very heat of the day.
Genesis 18:2	And when he had lifted up his eyes, there appeared to him three men, standing near him. When he had seen them, he ran to meet them from the door of his tent, and he reverenced them on the ground.
Genesis 18:3	And he said: “If I, O lord, have found grace in your eyes, do not pass by your servant.
Genesis 18:4	But I will bring a little water, and you may wash your feet and rest under the tree.
Genesis 18:5	And I will set out a meal of bread, so that you may strengthen your heart; after this you will pass on. It is for this reason that you have turned aside to your servant.” And they said, “Do as you have spoken.”
Genesis 18:6	Abraham hurried into the tent to Sarah, and he said to her, “Quickly, mix together three measures of the finest wheat flour and make loaves baked under the ashes.”
Genesis 18:7	In truth, he himself ran to the herd, and he took a calf from there, very tender and very good, and he gave it to a servant, who hurried and boiled it.
Genesis 18:8	Likewise, he took butter and milk, and the calf which he had boiled, and he placed it before them. Yet truly, he himself stood near them under the tree.
Genesis 18:9	And when they had eaten, they said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” He answered, “Behold, she is in the tent.”
Genesis 18:10	And he said to him, “When returning, I will come to you at this time, with life as a companion, and your wife Sarah will have a son.” Hearing this, Sarah laughed behind the door of the tent.
Genesis 18:11	Now they were both old, and in an advanced state of life, and it had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
Genesis 18:12	And she laughed secretly, saying, “After I have grown old, and my lord is elderly, shall I give myself to the work of delight?”
Genesis 18:13	Then the Lord said to Abraham: “Why did Sarah laugh, saying: ‘How can I, an old woman, actually give birth?’
Genesis 18:14	Is anything difficult for God? According to the announcement, he will return to you at this same time, with life as a companion, and Sarah will have a son.”
Genesis 18:15	Sarah denied it, saying, “I did not laugh.” For she was terribly afraid. But the Lord said, “It is not so; for you did laugh.”
Genesis 18:16	Therefore, when the men had risen up from there, they directed their eyes against Sodom. And Abraham traveled with them, leading them.
Genesis 18:17	And the Lord said: “How could I hide what I am about to do from Abraham,
Genesis 18:18	since he will become a great and very robust nation, and in him all the nations of the earth will be blessed?
Genesis 18:19	For I know that he will instruct his sons, and his household after him, to keep to the way of the Lord, and to act with judgment and justice, so that, for the sake of Abraham, the Lord may bring about all the things that he has spoken to him.”
Genesis 18:20	And so the Lord said, “The outcry from Sodom and Gomorrah has been multiplied, and their sin has become exceedingly grievous.
Genesis 18:21	I will descend and see whether they have fulfilled the work of the outcry that has reached me, or whether it is not so, in order that I may know.”
Genesis 18:22	And they turned themselves from there, and they went toward Sodom. Yet in truth, Abraham still stood in the sight of the Lord.
Genesis 18:23	And as they drew near, he said: “Will you destroy the just with the impious?
Genesis 18:24	If there were fifty of the just in the city, will they perish with the rest? And will you not spare that place for the sake of fifty of the just, if they were in it?
Genesis 18:25	Far be it from you to do this thing, and to kill the just with the impious, and for the just to be treated like the impious. No, this is not like you. You judge all the earth; you would never make such a judgment.”
Genesis 18:26	And the Lord said to him, “If I find in Sodom fifty of the just in the midst of the city, I will release the entire place because of them.”
Genesis 18:27	And Abraham responded by saying: “Since now I have begun, I will speak to my Lord, though I am dust and ashes.
Genesis 18:28	What if there were five less than fifty of the just? Would you, despite the forty-five, eliminate the entire city?” And he said, “I will not eliminate it, if I find forty-five there.”
Genesis 18:29	And again he said to him, “But if forty were found there, what would you do?” He said, “I will not strike, for the sake of the forty.”
Genesis 18:30	“I ask you,” he said, “not to be angry, Lord, if I speak. What if thirty were found there?” He responded, “I will not act, if I find thirty there.”
Genesis 18:31	“Since now I have begun,” he said, “I will speak to my Lord. What if twenty were found there?” He said, “I will not put to death, for the sake of the twenty.”
Genesis 18:32	“I beg you,” he said, “not to be angry, Lord, if I speak yet once more. What if ten were found there?” And he said, “I will not destroy it for the sake of the ten.”
Genesis 18:33	And the Lord departed, after he had ceased speaking to Abraham, who then returned to his place.
Genesis 19:1	And the two Angels arrived at Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting at the gate of the city. And when he had seen them, he rose up and went to meet them. And he reverenced prone on the ground.
Genesis 19:2	And he said: “I beg you, my lords, turn aside to the house of your servant, and lodge there. Wash your feet, and in the morning you will advance on your way.” And they said, “Not at all. But we will lodge in the street.”
Genesis 19:3	He pressed them very much to turn aside to him. And when they had entered his house, he made a feast for them, and he cooked unleavened bread, and they ate.
Genesis 19:4	But before they went to bed, the men of the city surrounded the house, from boys to old men, all the people together.
Genesis 19:5	And they called out to Lot, and they said to him: “Where are the men who entered to you in the night? Bring them out here, so that we may know them.”
Genesis 19:6	Lot went out to them, and blocking the door behind him, he said:
Genesis 19:7	“Do not, I ask you, my brothers, do not be willing to commit this evil.
Genesis 19:8	I have two daughters who as yet have not known man. I will bring them out to you; abuse them as it pleases you, provided that you do no evil to these men, because they have entered under the shadow of my roof.”
Genesis 19:9	But they said, “Move away from there.” And again: “You have entered,” they said, “as a stranger; should you then judge? Therefore, we will afflict you yourself more than them.” And they acted very violently against Lot. And they were now at the point of breaking open the doors.
Genesis 19:10	And behold, the men put out their hand, and they pulled Lot in to them, and they closed the door.
Genesis 19:11	And they struck those who were outside with blindness, from the least to the greatest, so that they were not able to find the door.
Genesis 19:12	Then they said to Lot: “Do you have here anyone of yours? All who are yours, sons-in-law, or sons, or daughters, bring them out of this city.
Genesis 19:13	For we will eliminate this place, because the outcry among them has increased before the Lord, who sent us to destroy them.”
Genesis 19:14	And so Lot, going out, spoke to his sons-in-law, who were going to receive his daughters, and he said: “Rise up. Depart from this place. For the Lord will destroy this city.” And it seemed to them that he was speaking playfully.
Genesis 19:15	And when it was morning, the Angels compelled him, saying, “Arise, take your wife, and the two daughters that you have, lest you also should perish amid the wickedness of the city.”
Genesis 19:16	And, since he ignored them, they took his hand, and the hand of his wife, as well as that of his two daughters, because the Lord was sparing him.
Genesis 19:17	And they brought him out, and placed him beyond the city. And there they spoke to him, saying: “Save your life. Do not look not back. Neither should you stay in the entire surrounding region. But save yourself in the mountain, lest you also should perish.”
Genesis 19:18	And Lot said to them: “I beg you, my lord,
Genesis 19:19	though your servant has found grace before you, and you have magnified your mercy, which you have shown to me in saving my life, I cannot be saved on the mountain, lest perhaps some misfortune take hold of me and I die.
Genesis 19:20	There is a certain city nearby, to which I can flee; it is a little one, and I will be saved in it. Is it not a modest one, and will not my soul live?”
Genesis 19:21	And he said to him: “Behold, even now, I have heard your petitions about this, not to overturn the city on behalf of which you have spoken.
Genesis 19:22	Hurry and be saved there. For I cannot do anything until you enter there.” For this reason, the name of that city is called Zoar.
Genesis 19:23	The sun had risen over the land, and Lot had entered into Zoar.
Genesis 19:24	Therefore, the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrah sulphur and fire, from the Lord, out of heaven.
Genesis 19:25	And he overturned these cities, and all the surrounding region: all the inhabitants of the cities, and everything that springs from the land.
Genesis 19:26	And his wife, looking behind herself, was turned into a statue of salt.
Genesis 19:27	Then Abraham, rising up in the morning, in the place where he had stood before with the Lord,
Genesis 19:28	looked out toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and the entire land of that region. And he saw embers rising up from the land like smoke from a furnace.
Genesis 19:29	For when God overthrew the cities of that region, remembering Abraham, he freed Lot from the overthrow of the cities, in which he had dwelt.
Genesis 19:30	And Lot ascended from Zoar, and he stayed on the mountain, and likewise his two daughters with him, (for he was afraid to stay in Zoar) and he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters with him.
Genesis 19:31	And the elder said to the younger: “Our father is old, and no man remains in the land who can enter to us according to the custom of the whole world.
Genesis 19:32	Come, let us inebriate him with wine, and let us sleep with him, so that we may be able to preserve offspring from our father.”
Genesis 19:33	And so they gave their father wine to drink that night. And the elder went in, and she slept with her father. But he did not perceive it, neither when his daughter lay down, nor when she rose up.
Genesis 19:34	Likewise, the next day, the elder said to the younger: “Behold, yesterday I slept with my father, let us give him wine to drink yet again this night, and you will sleep with him, so that we may save offspring from our father.”
Genesis 19:35	And then they gave their father wine to drink that night also, and the younger daughter went in, and slept with him. And not even then did he perceive when she lay down, or when she rose up.
Genesis 19:36	Therefore, the two daughters of Lot conceived by their father.
Genesis 19:37	And the elder gave birth to a son, and she called his name Moab. He is the father of the Moabites, even to the present day.
Genesis 19:38	Likewise, the younger gave birth to a son, and she called his name Ammon, that is, ‘the son of my people.’ He is the father of the Ammonites, even today.
Genesis 20:1	Abraham advanced from there into the southern land, and he lived between Kadesh and Shur. And he sojourned in Gerar.
Genesis 20:2	And he said about his wife Sarah: “She is my sister.” Therefore, Abimelech, the king of Gerar, sent for her and took her.
Genesis 20:3	Then God came to Abimelech through a dream in the night, and he said to him: “Lo, you shall die because of the woman that you have taken. For she has a husband.”
Genesis 20:4	In truth, Abimelech had not touched her, and so he said: “Lord, would you put to death a people, ignorant and just?
Genesis 20:5	Did he not say to me, ‘She is my sister,’ and did she not say, ‘He is my brother?’ In the sincerity of my heart and the purity of my hands, I have done this.”
Genesis 20:6	And God said to him: “And I know that you have acted with a sincere heart. And therefore I kept you from sinning against me, and I did not release you to touch her.
Genesis 20:7	Now therefore, return his wife to the man, for he is a prophet. And he will pray for you, and you will live. But if you are not willing to return her, know this: you shall die a death, you and all that is yours.”
Genesis 20:8	And immediately Abimelech, rising up in the night, called all his servants. And he spoke all these words in their hearing, and all the men were very afraid.
Genesis 20:9	Then Abimelech called also for Abraham, and he said to him: “What have you done to us? How have we sinned against you, so that you would bring so great a sin upon me and upon my kingdom? You have done to us what you ought not to have done.”
Genesis 20:10	And remonstrating him again, he said, “What did you see, so that you would do this?”
Genesis 20:11	Abraham responded: “I thought to myself, saying: Perhaps there is no fear of God in this place. And they will put me to death because of my wife.
Genesis 20:12	Yet, in another way, she is also truly my sister, the daughter of my father, and not the daughter of my mother, and I took her as a wife.
Genesis 20:13	Then, after God led me out of my father’s house, I said to her: ‘You will show this mercy to me. In every place, to which we will travel, you will say that I am your brother.’ ”
Genesis 20:14	Therefore, Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and men servants and women servants, and he gave them to Abraham. And he returned his wife Sarah to him.
Genesis 20:15	And he said, “The land is in your sight. Dwell wherever it will please you.”
Genesis 20:16	Then to Sarah he said: “Behold, I have given your brother one thousand silver coins. This will be for you as a veil for your eyes, to all who are with you and wherever you will travel. And so, remember that you were taken.”
Genesis 20:17	Then when Abraham prayed, God healed Abimelech and his wife, and his handmaids, and they gave birth.
Genesis 20:18	For the Lord had closed every womb of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, the wife of Abraham.
Genesis 21:1	Then the Lord visited Sarah, just as he had promised; and he fulfilled what he had spoken.
Genesis 21:2	And she conceived and gave birth to a son in her old age, at the time that God had foretold to her.
Genesis 21:3	And Abraham called the name of his son, whom Sarah bore for him, Isaac.
Genesis 21:4	And he circumcised him on the eighth day, just as God had instructed him,
Genesis 21:5	when he was one hundred years old. Indeed, at this stage of his father’s life, Isaac was born.
Genesis 21:6	And Sarah said: “God has brought laughter to me. Whoever will hear of it will laugh with me.”
Genesis 21:7	And again, she said: “Hearing this, who would believe Abraham, that Sarah breast-fed a son, to whom she gave birth, despite being elderly?”
Genesis 21:8	And the boy grew and was weaned. And Abraham made a great feast on the day of his weaning.
Genesis 21:9	And when Sarah had seen the son of Hagar the Egyptian playing with her son Isaac, she said to Abraham:
Genesis 21:10	“Cast out this woman servant and her son. For the son of a woman servant will not be heir with my son Isaac.”
Genesis 21:11	Abraham took this grievously, for the sake of his son.
Genesis 21:12	And God said to him: “Let it not seem harsh to you concerning the boy and your woman servant. In all that Sarah has said to you, listen to her voice. For your offspring will be invoked in Isaac.
Genesis 21:13	Yet I will also make the son of the woman servant into a great nation, for he is your offspring.”
Genesis 21:14	And so Abraham arose in the morning, and taking bread and a skin of water, he placed it upon her shoulder, and he handed over the boy, and he released her. And when she had departed, she wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
Genesis 21:15	And when the water in the skin had been consumed, she set aside the boy, under one of the trees that were there.
Genesis 21:16	And she moved away and sat in a distant area, as far as a bow can reach. For she said, “I shall not see the boy die.” And so, sitting opposite her, he lifted up his voice and wept.
Genesis 21:17	But God heard the voice of the boy. And an Angel of God called to Hagar from heaven, saying: “What are you doing, Hagar? Do not be afraid. For God has heeded the voice of the boy, from the place where he is.
Genesis 21:18	Rise up. Take the boy and hold him by the hand. For I will make of him a great nation.”
Genesis 21:19	And God opened her eyes. And seeing a well of water, she went and filled the skin, and she gave the boy to drink.
Genesis 21:20	And God was with him. And he grew, and he stayed in the wilderness, and he became a young man, an archer.
Genesis 21:21	And he lived in the desert of Paran, and his mother took a wife for him from the land of Egypt.
Genesis 21:22	At the same time, Abimelech and Phicol, the leader of his army, said to Abraham: “God is with you in everything that you do.
Genesis 21:23	Therefore, swear by God that you will do no harm to me, and to my posterity, and to my stock. But according to the mercy that I have done to you, you will do to me and to the land, to which you have turned as a newcomer.”
Genesis 21:24	And Abraham said, “I will swear.”
Genesis 21:25	And he reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which his servants had taken away by force.
Genesis 21:26	And Abimelech responded, “I do not know who did this thing, but you also did not reveal it to me, nor have I heard of it, before today.”
Genesis 21:27	And so Abraham took sheep and oxen, and he gave them to Abimelech. And both of them struck a pact.
Genesis 21:28	And Abraham set aside seven female lambs from the flock.
Genesis 21:29	Abimelech said to him, “What purpose have these seven female lambs, which you have caused to stand separately?”
Genesis 21:30	But he said, “You will receive seven female lambs from my hand, so that they may be a testimony for me, that I dug this well.”
Genesis 21:31	For this reason, that place was called Beersheba, because there both of them did swear.
Genesis 21:32	And they initiated a pact on behalf of the well of oath.
Genesis 21:33	Then Abimelech and Phicol, the leader of his army, rose up, and they returned to the land of the Palestinians. In truth, Abraham planted a grove in Beersheba, and there he called upon the name of the Lord God Eternal.
Genesis 21:34	And he was a settler in the land of the Palestinians for many days.
Genesis 22:1	After these things occurred, God tested Abraham, and he said to him, “Abraham, Abraham.” And he answered, “Here I am.”
Genesis 22:2	He said to him: “Take your only begotten son Isaac, whom you love, and go into the land of vision. And there you shall offer him as a holocaust upon one of the mountains, which I will show to you.”
Genesis 22:3	And so Abraham, getting up in the night, harnessed his donkey, taking with him two youths, and his son Isaac. And when he had cut wood for the holocaust, he traveled toward the place, as God had instructed him.
Genesis 22:4	Then, on the third day, lifting up his eyes, he saw the place at a distance.
Genesis 22:5	And he said to his servants: “Wait here with the donkey. I and the boy will hurry further ahead to that place. After we have worshipped, will return to you.”
Genesis 22:6	He also took the wood for the holocaust, and he imposed it upon his son Isaac. And he himself carried in his hands fire and a sword. And as the two continued on together,
Genesis 22:7	Isaac said to his father, “My father.” And he answered, “What do you want, son?” “Behold,” he said, “fire and wood. Where is the victim for the holocaust?”
Genesis 22:8	But Abraham said, “God himself will provide the victim for the holocaust, my son.” Thus they continued on together.
Genesis 22:9	And they came to the place that God had shown to him. There he built an altar, and he set the wood in order upon it. And when he had bound his son Isaac, he laid him on the altar upon the pile of wood.
Genesis 22:10	And he reached out his hand and took hold of the sword, in order to sacrifice his son.
Genesis 22:11	And behold, an Angel of the Lord called out from heaven, saying, “Abraham, Abraham.” And he answered, “Here I am.”
Genesis 22:12	And he said to him, “Do not extend your hand over the boy, and do not do anything to him. Now I know that you fear God, since you have not spared your only begotten son for my sake.”
Genesis 22:13	Abraham lifted up his eyes, and he saw behind his back a ram among the thorns, caught by the horns, which he took and offered as a holocaust, instead of his son.
Genesis 22:14	And he called the name of that place: ‘The Lord Sees.’ Thus, even to this day, it is said: ‘On the mountain, the Lord will see.’
Genesis 22:15	Then the Angel of the Lord called out to Abraham a second time from heaven, saying:
Genesis 22:16	“By my own self, I have sworn, says the Lord. Because you have done this thing, and have not spared your only begotten son for my sake,
Genesis 22:17	I will bless you, and I will multiply your offspring like the stars of heaven, and like the sand which is on the seashore. Your offspring will possess the gates of their enemies.
Genesis 22:18	And in your offspring, all the nations of the earth will be blessed, because you obeyed my voice.”
Genesis 22:19	Abraham returned to his servants, and they went to Beersheba together, and he lived there.
Genesis 22:20	After these things occurred, it was reported to Abraham that Milcah, likewise, had borne sons for his brother Nahor:
Genesis 22:21	Uz, the firstborn, and Buz, his brother, and Kemuel, the father of the Syrians,
Genesis 22:22	and Chesed, and Hazo, likewise Pildash, and Jidlaph,
Genesis 22:23	as well as Bethuel, of whom was born Rebekah. These eight Milcah bore for Nahor, the brother of Abraham.
Genesis 22:24	In truth, his concubine, named Reumah, bore Tebah, and Gaham, and Tahash, and Maacah.
Genesis 23:1	Now Sarah lived for one hundred and twenty-seven years.
Genesis 23:2	And she died in the city of Arba, which is Hebron, in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to mourn and weep for her.
Genesis 23:3	And when he had risen up from the funeral duties, he spoke to the sons of Heth, saying:
Genesis 23:4	“I am a newcomer and a sojourner among you. Give me the right of a sepulcher among you, so that I may bury my dead.”
Genesis 23:5	The sons of Heth responded by saying:
Genesis 23:6	“Hear us, O lord, you are a leader of God among us. Bury your dead in our chosen sepulchers. And no man shall be able to prohibit you from burying your dead within his memorial.”
Genesis 23:7	Abraham arose, and he reverenced the people of the land, namely, the sons of Heth.
Genesis 23:8	And he said to them: “If it pleases your soul that I should bury my dead, hear me, and intercede on my behalf with Ephron, the son of Zohar,
Genesis 23:9	so that he may give me the double cave, which he has at the far end of his field. He may transfer it to me for as much money as it is worth in your sight, for the possession of a sepulcher.”
Genesis 23:10	Now Ephron dwelt in the midst of the sons of Heth. And Ephron responded to Abraham in the hearing of everyone who was entering at the gate of his city, saying:
Genesis 23:11	“Let it never be so, my lord, but you should pay greater heed to what I say. The field I will transfer to you, and the cave that is in it. In the presence of the sons of my people, bury your dead.”
Genesis 23:12	Abraham reverenced in the sight of the people of the land.
Genesis 23:13	And he spoke to Ephron, standing in the midst of the people: “I ask you to hear me. I will give you money for the field. Take it, and so I will bury my dead in it.”
Genesis 23:14	And Ephron responded: “My lord, hear me.
Genesis 23:15	The land that you request is worth four hundred shekels of silver. This is the price between me and you. But how much is this? Bury your dead.”
Genesis 23:16	And when Abraham had heard this, he weighed out the money that Ephron had requested, in the hearing of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, of the approved public currency.
Genesis 23:17	And having confirmed that the field, in which there was a double cave overlooking Mamre, formerly belonged to Ephron, both it and the sepulcher, and all its trees, with all its surrounding limits,
Genesis 23:18	Abraham took it as a possession, in the sight of the sons of Heth and of everyone who was entering at the gate of his city.
Genesis 23:19	So then, Abraham buried his wife Sarah in the double cave of the field that overlooked Mamre. This is Hebron in the land of Canaan.
Genesis 23:20	And the field was confirmed to Abraham, with the cave that was in it, as a memorial possession before the sons of Heth.
Genesis 24:1	Now Abraham was old and of many days. And the Lord had blessed him in all things.
Genesis 24:2	And he said to the elder servant of his house, who was in charge of all that he had: “Place your hand under my thigh,
Genesis 24:3	so that I may make you swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and earth, that you will not take a wife for my son from the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I live.
Genesis 24:4	But that you will proceed to my land and kindred, and from there take a wife for my son Isaac.”
Genesis 24:5	The servant responded, “If the woman is not willing to come with me into this land, must I lead your son back to the place from which you departed?”
Genesis 24:6	And Abraham said: “Beware that you never lead my son back to that place.
Genesis 24:7	The Lord God of heaven, who took me from my father’s house, and from the land of my nativity, who spoke to me and swore to me, saying, ‘To your offspring I will give this land,’ himself will send his Angel before you, and you will take from there a wife for my son.
Genesis 24:8	But if the woman is not willing to follow you, you will not be held by the oath. Only do not lead my son back to that place.”
Genesis 24:9	Therefore, the servant placed his hand under the thigh of Abraham, his lord, and he swore to him on his word.
Genesis 24:10	And he took ten camels from his lord’s herd, and he went forth, carrying with him things from all of his goods. And he set out, and continued on, to the city of Nahor, in Mesopotamia.
Genesis 24:11	And when he had made the camels lie down outside of the town, near a well of water, in the evening, at the time when women are accustomed to go out to draw water, he said:
Genesis 24:12	“O Lord, the God of my lord Abraham, meet with me today, I beg you, and show mercy to my lord Abraham.
Genesis 24:13	Behold, I stand near the fountain of water, and the daughters of the inhabitants of this city will go forth to draw water.
Genesis 24:14	Therefore, the girl to whom I will say, ‘Tip your pitcher, so that I may drink,’ and she will respond, ‘Drink. In fact, I will give your camels a drink also,’ the same one is she whom you have prepared for your servant Isaac. And by this, I will understand that you have shown mercy to my lord.”
Genesis 24:15	But he had not yet completed these words within himself, when, behold, Rebekah went out, the daughter of Bethuel, son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, the brother of Abraham, having a pitcher on her shoulder.
Genesis 24:16	She was an exceedingly elegant girl, and a most beautiful virgin, and unknown by man. And she descended to the spring, and she filled her pitcher, and then was returning.
Genesis 24:17	And the servant ran to meet her, and he said, “Provide me with a little water to drink from your pitcher.”
Genesis 24:18	And she responded, “Drink, my lord.” And she quickly brought down the pitcher on her arm, and she gave him a drink.
Genesis 24:19	And after he drank, she added, “In fact, I will draw water for your camels also, until they all drink.”
Genesis 24:20	And pouring out the pitcher into the troughs, she ran back to the well to draw water; and having drawn, she gave it to all the camels.
Genesis 24:21	But he was contemplating her silently, wanting to know whether the Lord had caused his journey to prosper or not
Genesis 24:22	Then, after the camels drank, the man took out gold earrings, weighing two shekels, and the same number of bracelets, ten shekels in weight.
Genesis 24:23	And he said to her: “Whose daughter are you? Tell me, is there any place in your father’s house to lodge?”
Genesis 24:24	She responded, “I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Milcah, to whom she gave birth for Nahor.”
Genesis 24:25	And she continued, saying, “There is very much straw and hay with us, and a spacious place to stay.”
Genesis 24:26	The man bowed himself down, and he adored the Lord,
Genesis 24:27	saying, “Blessed be the Lord, the God of my lord Abraham, who has not taken away his mercy and truth from my lord, and who has led me on a direct journey to the house of the brother of my lord.”
Genesis 24:28	And so the girl ran, and she reported all that she had heard in the house of her mother.
Genesis 24:29	Now Rebekah had a brother, named Laban, who went out quickly to the man, where the spring was.
Genesis 24:30	And when he had seen the earrings and bracelets in his sister’s hands, and he had heard all the words being repeated, “This is what the man spoke to me,” he came to the man who stood by the camels and near the spring of water,
Genesis 24:31	and he said to him: “Enter, O blessed of the Lord. Why do you stand outside? I have prepared the house, and a place for the camels.”
Genesis 24:32	And he brought him into his guest quarters. And he unharnessed the camels, and he distributed straw and hay, and water to wash his feet and that of the men who arrived with him.
Genesis 24:33	And bread was set out in his sight. But he said, “I will not eat, until I have spoken my words.” He answered him, “Speak.”
Genesis 24:34	Then he said: “I am the servant of Abraham.
Genesis 24:35	And the Lord has blessed my lord greatly, and he has become great. And he has given him sheep and oxen, silver and gold, men servants and women servants, camels and donkeys.
Genesis 24:36	And Sarah, the wife of my lord, has given birth to a son for my lord in her old age, and he has given him all that he had.
Genesis 24:37	And my lord made me swear, saying: ‘You shall not take a wife for my son from the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell.
Genesis 24:38	But you shall travel to my father’s house, and you shall take a wife of my own kindred for my son.’
Genesis 24:39	But truly, I answered my lord, ‘What if the woman is not willing to come with me?’
Genesis 24:40	‘The Lord,’ he said, ‘in whose sight I walk, will send his Angel with you, and he will direct your way. And you shall take a wife for my son from my own kindred and from my father’s house.
Genesis 24:41	But you will be innocent of my curse, if, when you will arrive at my close relatives, they will not grant this to you.’
Genesis 24:42	And so, today I arrived at the well of water, and I said: ‘O Lord, the God of my lord Abraham, if you have directed my way, in which I now walk,
Genesis 24:43	behold, I stand next to the well of water, and the virgin, who will go forth to draw water, will hear from me, “Give me a little water to drink from your pitcher.”
Genesis 24:44	And she will say to me, “You drink, and I will also draw for your camels.” Let the same be the woman, whom the Lord has prepared for the son of my lord.’
Genesis 24:45	And while I thought over these things silently within myself, Rebekah appeared, arriving with a pitcher, which she carried on her shoulder. And she descended to the spring and drew water. And I said to her, ‘Give me a little to drink.’
Genesis 24:46	And she quickly let down the pitcher from her arm, and said to me, ‘You drink, and to your camels I will also distribute drinking water.’ I drank, and she watered the camels.
Genesis 24:47	And I questioned her, saying, ‘Whose daughter are you?’ And she responded, ‘I am the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, whom Milcah bore to him.’ And so, I hung the earrings on her, to adorn her face, and I put the bracelets on her hands.
Genesis 24:48	And falling prostrate, I adored the Lord, blessing the Lord, the God of my lord Abraham, who has led me along the straight path so as to take the daughter of my lord’s brother to his son.
Genesis 24:49	For this reason, if you would act according to mercy and truth with my lord, tell me so. But if it pleases you otherwise, say that to me also, so that I may go either to the right, or to the left.”
Genesis 24:50	And Laban and Bethuel responded: “A word has proceeded from the Lord. We are not able to speak anything else to you, beyond what pleases him.
Genesis 24:51	Lo, Rebekah is in your sight. Take her and continue on, and let her be the wife of the son of your lord, just as the Lord has spoken.”
Genesis 24:52	When Abraham’s servant had heard this, falling down to the ground, he adored the Lord.
Genesis 24:53	And bringing forth vessels of silver and gold, as well as garments, he gave them to Rebekah as a tribute. Likewise, he offered gifts to her brothers and her mother.
Genesis 24:54	And a banquet began, and they feasted and drank together, and they lodged there. And rising up in the morning, the servant said, “Release me, so that I may go to my lord.”
Genesis 24:55	And her brothers and mother responded, “Let the girl remain for at least ten days with us, and after that, she will continue on.”
Genesis 24:56	“Do not be willing,” he said, “to delay me, for the Lord has directed my way. Release me, so that I may journey to my lord.”
Genesis 24:57	And they said, “Let us call the girl, and ask her will.”
Genesis 24:58	And when, having been called, she arrived, they wanted to know, “Will you go with this man?” And she said, “I will go.”
Genesis 24:59	Therefore, they released her and her nurse, and the servant of Abraham and his companions,
Genesis 24:60	wishing prosperity for their sister, by saying: “You are our sister. May you increase to thousands of thousands. And may your offspring possess the gates of their enemies.”
Genesis 24:61	And so, Rebekah and her maids, riding upon camels, followed the man, who quickly returned to his lord.
Genesis 24:62	Then, at the same time, Isaac was walking along the way that leads to the well, whose name is: ‘of the One who lives and who sees.’ For he dwelt in the southern land.
Genesis 24:63	And he had gone out to meditate in the field, as daylight was now declining. And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw camels advancing from afar.
Genesis 24:64	Likewise, Rebekah, having seen Isaac, descended from the camel.
Genesis 24:65	And she said to the servant, “Who is that man who advances to meet us through the field?” And he said to her, “That is my lord.” And so, quickly taking up her cloak, she covered herself.
Genesis 24:66	Then the servant explained to Isaac all that he had done.
Genesis 24:67	And he led her into the tent of Sarah his mother, and he accepted her as wife. And he loved her so very much, that it tempered the sorrow which befell him at his mother’s death.
Genesis 25:1	In truth, Abraham took another wife, named Keturah.
Genesis 25:2	And she bore to him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
Genesis 25:3	Likewise, Jokshan conceived Sheba and Dedan. The sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
Genesis 25:4	And truly, from Midian was born Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
Genesis 25:5	And Abraham gave everything that he possessed to Isaac.
Genesis 25:6	But to the sons of the concubines he gave generous gifts, and he separated them from his son Isaac, while he still lived, toward the eastern region.
Genesis 25:7	Now the days of Abraham’s life were one hundred and seventy-five years.
Genesis 25:8	And declining, he died in a good old age, and at an advanced stage of life, and full of days. And he was gathered to his people.
Genesis 25:9	And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the double cave, which was situated in the field of Ephron, of the son of Zohar the Hittite, across from the region of Mamre,
Genesis 25:10	which he had bought from the sons of Heth. There he was buried, with his wife Sarah.
Genesis 25:11	And after his passing, God blessed his son Isaac, who lived near the well named ‘of the One who lives and who sees.’
Genesis 25:12	These are the generations of Ishmael, the son of Abraham, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah’s servant, bore to him.
Genesis 25:13	And these are the names of his sons according to their language and generations. The firstborn of Ishmael was Nebaioth, then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
Genesis 25:14	likewise Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
Genesis 25:15	Hadad, and Tema, and Jetur, and Naphish, and Kedemah.
Genesis 25:16	These are the sons of Ishmael. And these are their names throughout their fortresses and towns: the twelve princes of their tribes.
Genesis 25:17	And the years of the life of Ishmael that passed were one hundred and thirty-seven. And declining, he died and was placed with his people.
Genesis 25:18	Now he had lived from Havilah as far as Shur, which overlooks Egypt as it approaches the Assyrians. He passed away in the sight of all his brothers.
Genesis 25:19	Likewise, these are the generations of Isaac, the son of Abraham. Abraham conceived Isaac,
Genesis 25:20	who, when he was forty years old, took Rebekah, the sister of Laban, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian from Mesopotamia, as a wife.
Genesis 25:21	And Isaac beseeched the Lord on behalf of his wife, because she was barren. And he heard him, and he gave conception to Rebekah.
Genesis 25:22	But the little ones struggled in her womb. So she said, “If it was to be so with me, what need was there to conceive?” And she went to consult the Lord.
Genesis 25:23	And responding, he said, “Two nations are in your womb, and two peoples will be divided out of your womb, and one people will overcome the other people, and the elder will serve the younger.”
Genesis 25:24	Now the time had arrived to give birth, and behold, twins were discovered in her womb.
Genesis 25:25	He who departed first was red, and entirely hairy like a pelt; and his name was called Esau. At once the other departed and he held his brother’s foot in his hand; and because of this he was called Jacob.
Genesis 25:26	Isaac was sixty years old when the little ones were born to him.
Genesis 25:27	And as adults, Esau became a knowledgeable hunter and a man of agriculture, but Jacob, a simple man, dwelt in tents.
Genesis 25:28	Isaac was fond of Esau, because he was fed from his hunting; and Rebekah loved Jacob.
Genesis 25:29	Then Jacob boiled a small meal. Esau, when he had arrived weary from the field,
Genesis 25:30	said to him, “Give me this red stew, for I am very tired.” For this reason, his name was called Edom.
Genesis 25:31	Jacob said to him, “Sell me your right of the firstborn.”
Genesis 25:32	He answered, “Lo, I am dying, what will the right of the firstborn provide for me?”
Genesis 25:33	Jacob said, “So then, swear to me.” Esau swore to him, and he sold his right of the firstborn.
Genesis 25:34	And so, taking bread and the food of lentils, he ate, and he drank, and he went away, giving little weight to having sold the right of the firstborn.
Genesis 26:1	Then, when a famine arose over the land, after that barrenness which had happened in the days of Abraham, Isaac went to Abimelech, king of the Palestinians, in Gerar.
Genesis 26:2	And the Lord appeared to him, and he said: “Do not descend into Egypt, but rest in the land that I will tell you,
Genesis 26:3	and sojourn in it, and I will be with you, and I will bless you. For to you and to your offspring I will give all these regions, completing the oath that I promised to Abraham your father.
Genesis 26:4	And I will multiply your offspring like the stars of heaven. And I will give to your posterity all these regions. And in your offspring all the nations of the earth will be blessed,
Genesis 26:5	because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my precepts and commandments, and observed the ceremonies and the laws.”